---
tags:
  - model
  - network
  - protocol
topic:
  - OSI Model
related:
  - "[[Link to another related note]]]]"
source:
  - Professor Messer Network+ 1.1
date: 2025-09-21
---
# OSI MODEL

## Definition
The OSI Model stands for Open Systems Interconnection Reference Model, It is a way to describe how traffic moves from one part of the network to another. The model consists of  7 layers, there are unique sets of protocols at every layer.

## Core Concept
-   **One-line summary:** It is a common language used to describe how data is progressing from the beginning of the traffic flow to the very end.
-   **Primary Purpose:** It describes how traffic moves from one part of the network to another.

## Key Details / How It Works
- **Key Components/Parts:** Application, Presentation, Session, Transport, Network, Data Link and Physical Layers. Layer 7-1.
    - Physical Layer: The first layer/ layer 1 of the OSI Model. This is the physics/physical part of the network, i.e signaling, cabling, connectors. This layer isn't about protocols. A physical layer problem would be to fix cabling, punch-downs, test/replace cables, etc. 
    - Data Link Layer: This is the second layer of the OSI Model, this is the foundational layers for the protocols we would be using from layer two upwards. This is sometimes referred to as the Data Link Control Protocol, with DLC protocols like Media Access Control (MAC) Addresses on ethernet.
    - Network Layer: The third layer of the OSI Model also known as the routing layer. This is the layer associated with Internet Protocol (IP) Addresses, any device that is making forwarding decisions based on these IP addresses, is communicating at layer three.
    - Transport Layer: This is the fourth layer of the OSI Model, also referred to as the post office layer. This is the layer that describes how data is being delivered and where it is being delivered into a system. The protocols used at this layer are protocols such as Transmission Control Protocol (TCP) and (UDP) User Datagram Protocol.
    - Session Layer: This is the fifth layer of the OSI Model, it is designed to start and stop communication between one endpoint and another. This is where we use control protocols or tunneling protocols in other to begin the communication of data between one device and another.
    - Presentation Layer: This is the sixth layer of the OSI Model, before we can be able to view information on our screen, the presentation layer needs to take the data and put it in a form that we can understand. Anything that deals with character encoding and application encryption will occur at layer 6.
    - Application Layer: This is the sixth layer of the OSI Model, it is the layer that we see. Using protocols like HTTP, FTP, DNS, POP3 means we are using an application layer protocol.
-  **Process/Flow:** Let's take for example an app like google mail. 
	- Application Layer: As we are using the application on our screen we are using the application layer of the OSI Model 
	- Presentation Layer: As we are sending information back and forth to our browser, everything being communicated to the google mail server is being encrypted by the presentation layer of the OSI Model using SSL encryption.
	- Session Layer: This links together everything above, the presentation and application layer to all of the traffic below that will be traversing the network.
	- Transport Layer: The google mail for example probably uses TCP 443, which means that we will be using the transport layer to send that TCP data.
	- Network Layer: The IP addresses used between your workstation and the google email server occurs thanks to the IP encapsulation associated with the network layer.
	- Data Link Layer: The TCP and IP traffic is being incapsulated within ethernet frames and the frames are being sent over the network thanks to the data link layer. 
	- Physical Layer: The physical signals to be able to send these frames from one device to another are occurring at the physical layer.
- **Diagrams:** (You can describe a diagram here, or better yet, use Obsidian's canvas feature or add screenshot later)
     - Example: "Data flows down the OSI Model from Application to Physical, getting encapsulated with headers at each layer."


## Review with DeepSeek
- **Question:** What is the most important purpose of the OSI Model?
- **Answer:** It is to standardize how systems communicate, compartmentalize the complex process of networking into simpler, manageable parts (layers), and to troubleshoot efficiently knowing what layer has issues for what program.
- **Question:** What is an example of a protocol or device that operates at one of the layers?
- **Answer:** MAC address at the data link layer, Router at the network layer, and TCP at the transport layer