Network+ Notes/1.2.md, before:

---
tags:
  - network
  - protocol
  - model
topic: Data Communication
related:
  - "[[1.1]]"
source:
  - "[Professor Messer N10-009 Network+](https://youtu.be/jKjVTPpcZT0?si=pbzmnKduL22QkIyF)"
date: 2025-09-22
---
# Data Communication

## Definition 


## Core Concept
-   **One-line summary:** A single-sentence description of this topic. What is it and why does it matter?
-   **Primary Purpose:** What is this things main job or function?

## Key Details / How It Works
- **Key Components/Parts:** (e.g., For a protocol: Headers, Flags. For a tool: Main commands. For a model: The layers.)
-  **Process/Flow:** How does it operate? Step-by-step or data flow.
- **Diagrams:** (You can describe a diagram here, or better yet, use Obsidian's canvas feature or add screenshot later)
     - Example: "Data flows down the OSI Model from Application to Physical, getting encapsulated with headers at each layer."

## Technical Specifications & commands
```bash
# Place relevant code, command examples, or syntax here.
# Example for SHH:
# ssh <username>@<ip_address> -p <port>
ssh bandit0@bandit.labs.overthewire.org -p 2220
```

## Review with DeepSeek 
- **Questions:**
- **Answers:**
- **Questions:**
- **Answers:**
- **Questions:**
- **Answers:**

## Summary

Commit message:

Finished data communication by Prof Messer and started overthewire

Network+ Notes/1.2.md, after:

---
tags:
  - network
  - protocol
  - model
topic: Data Communication
related:
  - "[[1.1]]"
source:
  - "[[https://youtu.be/jKjVTPpcZT0?si=pbzmnKduL22QkIyF|Professor Messer N10-009 Network+]]]"
date: 2025-09-22
---
# Data Communication
## Core Concept
-   **One-line summary:** Getting data moved from one part of the network to the other relies on something called a PDU (Protocol Data Unit) also referred to as transmission units.
-   **Primary Purpose:** It takes data and transfers it across the network as a single unit

## Key Details / How It Works
- **Key Components/Parts:** Application Data, TCP header, IP header, Frame header and trailer.
-  **Process/Flow:** When data is being sent when using an application, for example from a web server to a web client, it is going to be encapsulated at each layer of the OSI model. 
	- Layer 5,6 and 7: These layers are called the application layer, this is where the application data exists 
	- Layer 4: To be able to send the data, we need to transport it across the network using the TCP protocol, so a TCP header is attached right in front of the application data.
	- Layer 3: We need an IP address that is able to send the TCP and the application data so an IP header is added that is able to send information from one IP address to another address.
	- Layer 2: And lastly over ethernet we need to have a DLC (Data Link Control) frame header and in many cases a frame trailer is added to indicate where the end of the frame is. The layer 2 frame header encapsulates all of the information within.
	- Layer 1: The total encapsulated information is going to be sent across the network 
	  (layer 1) to the destination device where it will then be decapsulated.
	And when the data is being received it is going to be decapsulated, from layer 2 up to layer 5,6 and 7
- **Diagram:** ![[datacommunication.png]]

### Extra Notes
Each layer has a header and payload. The header describes or identifies the payload. The header tells the rest of the data how it should be processed.
On layer 4 we have TCP data and the TCP header and within the TCP header we have information called the TCP flag, it helps us understand how we can process the data as it is going through the network. The flag controls the payload. 
There are also flags within the IP header, most of the flags in the ip header deals with the fragmentation of data. We have a Maximum Transmission Unit (MTU) which designates the size of the data that we are able to send through the network without having to fragment any of the information futher. Fragmentation slows down the overall flow of traffic.

## Review with DeepSeek 
- **Questions:**
- **Answers:**
- **Questions:**
- **Answers:**
- **Questions:**
- **Answers:**

## Summary
